\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename eager-state.info
@settitle eager-state
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Eager-State: (eager-state). Eagerly persist data onto disk.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title eager-state
@author Martin Edström
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top eager-state

Problem.  I'm missing some data every time I start Emacs: I can't find Org entries by @samp{org-id}@comma{} @samp{recentf} has forgotten a file I know I accessed five minutes ago@comma{} and so on.

Annoying@comma{} right?

Here's why it happens: many packages rely solely on @samp{kill-emacs-hook} to sync their state variables to disk.

That's always been sloppy design IMHO@comma{} but particularly since ~2015 norms that apps eagerly cache their state.  (What's a "save" button?)

Most of the time my Emacs goes down@comma{} it's a drained battery@comma{} SIGKILL@comma{} kernel panic@comma{} system freeze@comma{} Emacs freeze@comma{} segfault@comma{} forced log-out@comma{} X11/Wayland crash@comma{} yanked power cord@comma{} accidental or intentional power button event@comma{} or a perpetual process pause followed later by system shutdown.

Those things don't happen often@comma{} but those things are nevertheless the reason Emacs goes down@comma{} when it goes down.  Because@dots{} as long as there is no problem to fix@comma{} it's not as if I will shut it down just to do a nice and orderly shutdown.

Is that sinking in?  Either @strong{there is no problem@comma{}} in which case I don't @code{C-x C-c} (because I don't need to)@comma{} or @strong{there is a problem@comma{}} in which case I don't @code{C-x C-c} (because I can't).

I'm not sure who is the mythical user for whom Emacs usually goes down through a clean shutdown.  As a package dev@comma{} you definitely can't assume that about all your users.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Fix for end-users::
* For package devs::
* Similar packages::
* Tip Fixing slow functions::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

For package devs

* Why not write our own timer?::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Fix for end-users
@chapter Fix for end-users

Loading this package enables a global minor mode@comma{} @samp{eager-state-mode}.

(Yes@comma{} the mode enables itself on load -- reasons for that later.)

Out of the box@comma{} it has no effect.  You'll want to configure at least @samp{eager-state-kill-emacs-hook-subset}.  Here's a possible setup:

@lisp
(use-package eager-state
  :config
  (setq eager-state-kill-emacs-hook-subset
        '( bookmark-exit-hook-internal
           savehist-autosave
           transient-maybe-save-history
           org-clock-save
           org-id-locations-save
           save-place-kill-emacs-hook
           recentf-save-list
           recentf-cleanup))
  (setq eager-state-kill-emacs-query-functions-subset
        '( eshell-save-some-history
           eshell-save-some-last-dir)))
@end lisp

With the above setup@comma{} Emacs will try to run the listed functions every now and then.

How often it runs can be tuned through two variables:

@lisp
(setq eager-state-periodic-delay 60)
(setq eager-state-idle-delay 15)
@end lisp

That's it in a nutshell.

As a bonus@comma{} once you trust this mode@comma{} you may feel daring enough to speed up your Emacs restarts through the following setting.  It inhibits running any of the listed functions at shutdown time (i.e. it mangles your @samp{kill-emacs-hook}):

@lisp
(setq eager-state-faster-shutdown t)
@end lisp

@node For package devs
@chapter For package devs

Here's why the mode enables itself on load.

In addition to the two end-user hooks

@itemize
@item
@samp{eager-state-kill-emacs-hook-subset}
@item
@samp{eager-state-kill-emacs-query-functions-subset}
@end itemize

there is also a general hook

@itemize
@item
@samp{eager-state-sync-hook}
@end itemize

which is run along with the rest.  So@comma{} any package may @samp{require} this library@comma{} in order to gain access to that hook.  However@comma{} packages mustn't take it upon themselves to turn the mode on.  Had the user turned it off@comma{} it must stay off.

That's why a mere @samp{(require 'eager-state)} is sufficient to turn the mode on@comma{} barring user configuration such as @samp{(setq eager-state-inhibit t)}@comma{} in which case that's their prerogative.

Anyway@comma{} that's it!  Add your persistence functions to @samp{eager-state-sync-hook}.  Maybe also to @samp{kill-emacs-hook}@comma{} but that's a matter of taste.

@menu
* Why not write our own timer?::
@end menu

@node Why not write our own timer?
@section Why not write our own timer?

Say a package dev Alice realizes that she should put her state-persistence function on a timer@comma{} in addition to @samp{kill-emacs-hook}.  Yay@comma{} progress into the new millennium!  So her package includes the lines (simplified):

@lisp
(add-hook 'kill-emacs-hook #'alice-persist-function)
(run-with-idle-timer 100 t #'alice-persist-function) ;; such innovation
@end lisp

But now Bob@comma{} a long-time user of @samp{eager-state-mode}@comma{} will find his Emacs running @samp{alice-persist-function} @emph{twice} when he's idle.  Because his @samp{eager-state-kill-emacs-hook-subset} already contained a reference to @samp{alist-persist-function}.

That's normally not a problem@comma{} most persistence functions are well-behaved if executed many times.  But we cannot know that for sure@comma{} and it highlights the mess that may form once dozens of packages all have their own idle timers.

It'll be hard for me or anyone to stay up-to-date about which packages have an idle timer and which don't@comma{} and crowd-source a good definition for @samp{eager-state-kill-emacs-hook-subset}.

Furthermore@comma{} I've found it useful on occasion to spawn a throwaway Emacs that should not sync anything to disk.  Then I've been glad to be able to just turn off @samp{eager-state-mode} to prevent all of those functions from running.  This is probably a feature worth keeping.

Thus@comma{} I propose that we collectively put our state-persistence functions in a single place with a clear semantic intent.  That's @samp{eager-state-sync-hook}.

So instead of the aforementioned snippet

@lisp
(add-hook 'kill-emacs-hook #'alice-persist-function)
(run-with-idle-timer 100 t #'alice-persist-function)
@end lisp

Alice can type:

@lisp
(require 'eager-state)
(add-hook 'eager-state-sync-hook #'alice-persist-function)
(add-hook 'kill-emacs-hook #'alice-persist-function) ; optional
@end lisp

If this proves popular@comma{} maybe we can take the idea to Emacs core.

@node Similar packages
@chapter Similar packages

Someone else had a similar idea@comma{} but it is archived now: @uref{https://codeberg.org/bram85/emacs-persist-state.git}

@node Tip Fixing slow functions
@chapter Tip: Fixing slow functions

It can happen after setting up @samp{eager-state-mode} that you notice Emacs occasionally stuttering@comma{} or even freezing for a few seconds.

If so@comma{} one of the functions in @samp{eager-state-kill-emacs-hook-subset} is performing very poorly.

Track down the culprit by looking at the hidden log buffer:

@example
(pop-to-buffer " *eager-state*")
@end example

@bye
